# Airborn-Particulate-Matter-Sensor
Airborne particulate matter sensor for detecting particulate matter from pm10-pm1
All code and gerneral build instructions sourced from: https://how2electronics.com/interfacing-pms5003-air-quality-sensor-arduino/

Project:

I studied the effect of air-born particulate matter, specifically p.m2.5, on life expectancy. The amount of pm2.5 in the atmosphere directly correlates with global warming, as the same substances that increase the global temperature, like black carbon and sulfate, become particulate matter in the atmosphere. The world health organization estimated that pm2.5 matter in both cities and rural areas caused 4.2 million premature deaths worldwide per year in 2016. Also, A 2013 assessment by the World Health Organization’s International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) concluded that outdoor air pollution is carcinogenic to humans, with the particulate matter component of air pollution most closely associated with increased cancer incidence, especially lung cancer. Most particles form in the atmosphere as a result of complex reactions of chemicals such as sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides, which are pollutants emitted from power plants, industries, and automobiles. High concentrations of particulate matter are increasingly present in China and India.

Using the particulate matter sensor, I first tested the emissions from a BMW 2002(Made between 1968-1976) and the emissions from a more recently made 2018 BMW 540 for the presense of PM2.5 particulate matter. I found that both emitted  PM2.5 particles but the older BMW produced a many more PM2.5 particles than the newer BMW. I then expanded my experiment to test the amount of PM2.5 in 3 different areas that experienced increasing levels of vehicle traffic. I tested at a public park, a roadway and the parking garage of my local mall. The public park and he roadway had similarly low levels of PM2.5, but in the parking garage I found a significant presence of PM2.5 in the air.

The importance of home emissions testing devices has grown immesnley since I conducted this experiment in 2021 due to the wild fires in Canada and the American West and the case studies of China and India are becoming more relavent to the US as Americans now deal with dangerous air-quality daily in certain parts of the country.
